4.7 Markers.md, before:

# 4.7 Markers

## 4.7.1 Introduction

This section specifies the requirements for the *Marker* tool. A tool as defined here is a feature that adds functionality to the node software but is not an essential component. The Marker tool improves the efficiency with which certain properties  can be checked or certain metrics calculated.

The potential issues addressed by the use a Marker tool are in handling potentially numerically expensive operations. Specifically, the following operations can become numerically expensive:

* **Future- or past cone inclusion**. For certain applications we need to know, whether a certain message is in the past or future cone of another message. In the default approach the Tangle has to be walked until a given message is found.
* **Approval weight**. In order to compute the approval weight of a given message the node software needs to traverse the Tangle from that message to the tips and sum up the active consensus mana of all the messages in its future cone. 

The Marker tool allows a node to efficiently determine whether certain Markers are in the past or future cone of a given message, by reducing the proportion of the Tangle that needs to be traversed. 

The Marker tool achieves this by defining a parallel internal data structure, consisting of additional metadata applied to specific messages in the Tangle, to aid the Node in about determinations about the ordering of messages. Specifically, the Marker tool "marks" certain messages, which form a subDAG which approximates the topological structure of the tangle.  Furthermore, the markers  are grouped into sequences (which themselves form yet another DAG), which allow the node to quickly determine which markers reference each other.  

## 4.7.2 Definitions

The following terms are defined in relation to Markers:
* **UTXO branch:** This is a set of outputs that spawn off from a conflict transaction. Each UTXO branch by itself is conflict free. See also the [UTXO Section](4.2%20UTXO%20and%20Ledger%20Calculation.md).
* **Main branch:** The part of the UTXO DAG, in which all outputs are considered to be good in the sense that all conflicts in their past have been resolved, either by a given conflict being accepted or rejected. 
* **Rank:** For a given DAG the rank is defined as an increasing index for the vertices of that DAG, or mathematically speaking, is the length of the longest directed path terminating in that object. Specifically, if a vertex $A$ directly references only $B$ and $C$ then $rank(A)=max(rank(B),rank(C))+1$.
* **Marker:** A message that is assigned additional properties locally on the node, and that tracks a particular UTXO branch.
* **Marker Identifier (`MID`):** The unique identifier of the Marker.
* **Marker DAG:** The collection of all markers.  Mathematically, the tangle induces a DAG structure.  
* **Marker Rank (`MR`):** The rank of a Marker in the Marker DAG.
* **Marker-Sequence:** A Marker-Sequence is a group of Markers. Each Marker-Sequence maps to a UTXO branch; see [Ledger State specification](Link).
* **Marker-Sequence Identifier (`SID`):** A Marker-Sequence Identifier is a number that uniquely identifies a Marker-Sequence.
* **Marker-Sequence rank (`SR`):** The rank of a Marker-Sequence in the Marker-Sequence DAG.
* **Future Marker (`FM`):** This field in the [message metadata](##%204.7.5%20Message%20Metadata) is (potentially) updated when a new Marker is generated in the future cone of the message, following the rules defined in Section "Message Metadata". Essentially it contains the list of Markers for which there is no other Marker between the Marker in question and the message, or in more mathematical terms, the minimal markers in the future cone.
* **Past Marker (`PM`):** A Past Marker of a message is a most recent Past Marker of the parents (with respect to `MR`). The Past Marker of a Marker is set to itself.


## 4.7.3 The Markers

A Marker consists of the following data:


### 4.7.3.1 Marker data

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MID</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Unique identifier of the Marker</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SID</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Unique Marker-Sequence identifier</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Marker Rank</td>
    </tr>
</table>
<br>

A new Marker shall be created by the Marker tool when any of the following conditions are met: 
* a new UTXO branch is created. This also creates a new Marker-Sequence.
* more than a certain number of messages (`maxMsgPerMarker`) have been received since the last Marker.  This rule must be applied per Marker-Sequence. I.e. for each Marker-Sequence with more than `maxMsgPerMarker` since the last Marker in that Marker-Sequence, the rule shall be applied independently.
* a certain time window (`maxTimePerMarker`) has passed since the last Marker. 

A Marker is created with a `MID`, an this `MID` must be unique. 

To set a new  Marker within a Marker-Sequence, the Marker tool randomly selects from strong tips set a message whose past marker is the last marker in the sequence. The next marker will then reference that transaction. If there is no strong tip with the appropriate past marker, the selection shall be from message in the weak tips set. The rank of the new marker should be one greater than the rank of all the past markers of the message.  

Since $\texttt{MR}(x)=1+\max \limits_{y: x\text{ references }y}\texttt{MR}(y)$, Marker ranks are monotonically non-decreasing such that 
$\forall x \in fc(y) \Rightarrow \texttt{MR}_x > \texttt{MR}_y$, 
where $fc(y)$ is the future cone of $y$.


## 4.7.4 The Marker-Sequence
Marker-Sequences are used to track the UTXO DAG branches, each branch corresponds to a Marker-Sequence with a unique `SID`, and the Marker-Sequences form a DAG. 
Each Marker-Sequence is associated with some data:

### 4.7.4.1 Marker-Sequence Data

Each Marker-Sequence is associated with some data, namely:

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SID</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>  
        <td>The Marker-Sequence identifier</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SR</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The rank of a Marker-Sequence in the Marker-Sequence DAG</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR_max</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The highest <code>MR</code> in the Marker-Sequence</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR_min</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The lowest <code>MR</code> in the Marker-Sequence</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>ParentReferences </code></td>
        <td>map[<code>Marker</code>] <code>Marker</code></td>
        <td>Relationship map to Markers from  parent Marker-Sequences  (*) </td>
    </tr>
</table>
<br/>

*The field `ParentReferences` models the relationship between Marker-Sequences. This maps which Marker in this Marker-Sequence references which other Markers from other Marker-Sequences. 

Whenever a new Marker is added that is a member of a given Marker-Sequence, `MR_max` and `ParentReferences` for that Marker-Sequence shall be updated. 

### 4.7.4.2 Creation of Marker-Sequences


A new Marker-Sequence shall be created when:
1. there's a conflict in a UTXO branch.
2. the UTXO branches are aggregated.
3. UTXO branches are merged.

Each new Marker-Sequence shall start with a new Marker. 

Whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created, the Marker tool shall assign:
- a new `SID`, created by the rule $new\texttt{SID}=1+last SID$. A new created `SID` must be unique. 
- a new $\texttt{SR}=1+max(\text{referenced }\texttt{SR})$. 
To prevent assigning a new `SID` when combining the same Marker-Sequences at different times, the Marker tool shall build parent-child relationships in a map whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created. 


For further details about the UTXO model, please refer to the Section ???UTXO???.


## 4.7.5 Message Metadata

For each message in the Tangle, the Marker tool shall maintain metadata that provides information about the Markers that are closest in the past or future cone of that message, as well as whether the message itself is a Marker and what rank the message has. The following message metadata shall be defined in the Marker tool to support that requirement:

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>IsMarker</code></td>
        <td>bool</td>
        <td>A flag to indicate whether a message is a Marker.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>PastMarkers</code></td>
        <td>map[<code>SID</code>]<code>MID</code></td>
        <td>A list of the closest Markers from different Marker-Sequences in the past cone of the message.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>FutureMarkers</code></td>
        <td>map[<code>SID</code>]<code>MID</code></td>
        <td>A list of the closest Markers from different Marker-Sequences in the future cone of the message.</td>     
    </tr>
</table>
<br>

The `PastMarkers` field contains 
* only the Marker identifier of itself, if the message is marked as a Marker.
* the Marker identifier of its closest PastMarkers (PMs), i.e. from each referenced Marker-Sequence only the Markers with the highest Marker Rank (`MR`). Markers which are referenced by other Markers in this list shall be removed.

The `FutureMarkers` (FM) list shall be empty at the start and shall be updated when a new Marker directly or indirectly references that list. 

The propagation of a FM to its past cone (i.e. the update of the `FutureMarkers` list in the encountered messages) shall not continue beyond a message if:

1. `FutureMarkers` of a message includes a previous Marker of the same Marker-Sequence; the message that includes such a Marker shall not get updated.
2. the message is the Marker in a different Marker-Sequence. Then the `FutureMarkers` shall be updated for that Marker only.

Through this approach past and future Markers do not cross weak parents.

## 4.7.6 Marker Application Description

Figure 1 shows an example of how the Markers and Marker-Sequences (here also called Sequence) would look in the Tangle from the perspective of the Message DAG, the Marker DAG and the Marker-Sequence DAG. The purple colored messages are Markers:

![](https://i.imgur.com/GENej3O.png)

**Figure 1: Markers and Marker-Sequences in the Tangle**

### 4.7.6.1 Example Implementation

An illustrative example of the Markers tool in action is provided [here](https://github.com/iotaledger/goshimmer/blob/docs/marker_update/packages/tangle/images/TestBookerMarkerMappings.md) for the prototype implementation. 

### 4.7.6.2 Approval weight approximation

To approximate the approval weight of a message, the Markers tool retrieves the approval weight of `FutureMarkers`. Since a given message is in the past cone of its FMs, the approval weight and thus the finality of the message will be at least the same as the maximum weight of its FMs. This gives a lower bound (which is the “safe” bound), and if the Markers are set frequently enough, this provides a good approximation of that bound. 

### 4.7.6.3 Past cone check

By comparing the `PastMarkers` of a message with the `FutureMarkers` of another message, the Markers tool can determine if that message is in the past cone of the other. For example, consider two messages `X` and `Y` that are members in the same Marker-Sequence. Then if `PM(X)>FM(Y)`, then `X` is in the future of `Y`.

One way in which this check can be carried out is by traversing the Marker DAG while remaining in the bounds of the Marker ranks. 

A potential optimization is that the Marker-Sequence DAG can be traversed while considering the Marker-Sequence ranks, prior to any traversal of the Marker DAG.

It is possible that the Marker DAG does not cover certain areas of the message DAG at a given point in time. In this case, a check on this question can return one of the following three values:

* `True` 
* `False` 
* `Maybe`

If the check returns a `Maybe`, then the Message DAG must be searched via a search algorithm.



For an example implementation of the algorithm for the Past cone check visit [GoShimmer Markers](https://github.com/iotaledger/goshimmer/blob/develop/docs/specification/003-markers.md).

Commit message:

add description for double spend update

4.7 Markers.md, after:

# 4.7 Markers

## 4.7.1 Introduction

This section specifies the requirements for the *Marker* tool. A tool as defined here is a feature that adds functionality to the node software but is not an essential component. The Marker tool improves the efficiency with which certain properties  can be checked or certain metrics calculated.

The potential issues addressed by the use a Marker tool are in handling potentially numerically expensive operations. Specifically, the following operations can become numerically expensive:

* **Future- or past cone inclusion**. For certain applications we need to know, whether a certain message is in the past or future cone of another message. In the default approach the Tangle has to be walked until a given message is found.
* **Approval weight**. In order to compute the approval weight of a given message the node software needs to traverse the Tangle from that message to the tips and sum up the active consensus mana of all the messages in its future cone. 

The Marker tool allows a node to efficiently determine whether certain Markers are in the past or future cone of a given message, by reducing the proportion of the Tangle that needs to be traversed. 

The Marker tool achieves this by defining a parallel internal data structure, consisting of additional metadata applied to specific messages in the Tangle, to aid the Node in about determinations about the ordering of messages. Specifically, the Marker tool "marks" certain messages, which form a subDAG which approximates the topological structure of the tangle.  Furthermore, the markers  are grouped into sequences (which themselves form yet another DAG), which allow the node to quickly determine which markers reference each other.  

## 4.7.2 Definitions

The following terms are defined in relation to Markers:
* **UTXO branch:** This is a set of outputs that spawn off from a conflict transaction. Each UTXO branch by itself is conflict free. See also the sections that discuss [UTXO](4.2%20UTXO%20and%20Ledger%20Calculation.md) and [Branches](5.2%20Ledger%20State.md).
* **Main branch:** The part of the UTXO DAG, in which all outputs are considered to be good in the sense that all conflicts in their past have been resolved, either by a given conflict being accepted or rejected. 
* **Rank:** For a given DAG the rank is defined as an increasing index for the vertices of that DAG, or mathematically speaking, is the length of the longest directed path terminating in that object. Specifically, if a vertex $A$ directly references only $B$ and $C$ then $rank(A)=max(rank(B),rank(C))+1$.
* **Marker:** A message that is assigned additional properties locally on the node, and that tracks a particular UTXO branch.
* **Marker Identifier (`MID`):** The unique identifier of the Marker.
* **Marker DAG:** The collection of all markers.  Mathematically, the tangle induces a DAG structure.  
* **Marker Rank (`MR`):** The rank of a Marker in the Marker DAG.
* **Marker-Sequence:** A Marker-Sequence is a group of Markers. Each Marker-Sequence maps to a UTXO branch; see [Ledger State specification](Link).
* **Marker-Sequence Identifier (`SID`):** A Marker-Sequence Identifier is a number that uniquely identifies a Marker-Sequence.
* **Marker-Sequence rank (`SR`):** The rank of a Marker-Sequence in the Marker-Sequence DAG.
* **Future Marker (`FM`):** This field in the [message metadata](##%204.7.5%20Message%20Metadata) is (potentially) updated when a new Marker is generated in the future cone of the message, following the rules defined in Section "Message Metadata". Essentially it contains the list of Markers for which there is no other Marker between the Marker in question and the message, or in more mathematical terms, the minimal markers in the future cone.
* **Past Marker (`PM`):** A Past Marker of a message is a most recent Past Marker of the parents (with respect to `MR`). The Past Marker of a Marker is set to itself.


## 4.7.3 The Markers

A Marker consists of the following data:


### 4.7.3.1 Marker data

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MID</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Unique identifier of the Marker</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SID</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Unique Marker-Sequence identifier</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR</code></td>
        <td>uint64</td>
        <td>Marker Rank</td>
    </tr>
</table>
<br>

A new Marker shall be created by the Marker tool when any of the following conditions are met: 
* a new UTXO branch is created. This also creates a new Marker-Sequence.
* more than a certain number of messages (`maxMsgPerMarker`) have been received since the last Marker.  This rule must be applied per Marker-Sequence. I.e. for each Marker-Sequence with more than `maxMsgPerMarker` since the last Marker in that Marker-Sequence, the rule shall be applied independently.
* a certain time window (`maxTimePerMarker`) has passed since the last Marker. 

A Marker is created with a `MID`, an this `MID` must be unique. 

To set a new  Marker within a Marker-Sequence, the Marker tool randomly selects from strong tips set a message whose past marker is the last marker in the sequence. The next marker will then reference that transaction. If there is no strong tip with the appropriate past marker, the selection shall be from message in the weak tips set. The rank of the new marker should be one greater than the rank of all the past markers of the message.  

Since $\texttt{MR}(x)=1+\max \limits_{y: x\text{ references }y}\texttt{MR}(y)$, Marker ranks are monotonically non-decreasing such that 
$\forall x \in fc(y) \Rightarrow \texttt{MR}_x > \texttt{MR}_y$, 
where $fc(y)$ is the future cone of $y$.


## 4.7.4 The Marker-Sequence
Marker-Sequences are used to track the UTXO DAG branches, each branch corresponds to a Marker-Sequence with a unique `SID`, and the Marker-Sequences form a DAG. 
Each Marker-Sequence is associated with some data:

### 4.7.4.1 Marker-Sequence Data

Each Marker-Sequence is associated with some data, namely:

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SID</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>  
        <td>The Marker-Sequence identifier</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>SR</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The rank of a Marker-Sequence in the Marker-Sequence DAG</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR_max</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The highest <code>MR</code> in the Marker-Sequence</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>MR_min</code></td>
        <td>unit64</td>
        <td>The lowest <code>MR</code> in the Marker-Sequence</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>ParentReferences </code></td>
        <td>map[<code>Marker</code>] <code>Marker</code></td>
        <td>Relationship map to Markers from  parent Marker-Sequences  (*) </td>
    </tr>
</table>
<br/>

*The field `ParentReferences` models the relationship between Marker-Sequences. This maps which Marker in this Marker-Sequence references which other Markers from other Marker-Sequences. 

Whenever a new Marker is added that is a member of a given Marker-Sequence, `MR_max` and `ParentReferences` for that Marker-Sequence shall be updated. 

### 4.7.4.2 Creation of Marker-Sequences


A new Marker-Sequence shall be created when:
1. there's a conflict in a UTXO branch.
2. the UTXO branches are aggregated.
3. UTXO branches are merged.

Each new Marker-Sequence shall start with a new Marker. 

Whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created, the Marker tool shall assign:
- a new `SID`, created by the rule $new\texttt{SID}=1+last SID$. A new created `SID` must be unique. 
- a new $\texttt{SR}=1+max(\text{referenced }\texttt{SR})$. 
To prevent assigning a new `SID` when combining the same Marker-Sequences at different times, the Marker tool shall build parent-child relationships in a map whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created. 


For further details about the UTXO model, please refer to the section on [UTXO](https://github.com/iotaledger/Coordicide-Specifications/blob/main/4.2%20UTXO%20and%20Ledger%20Calculation.md).

### 4.7.4.2 Creation of Marker-Sequences


A new Marker-Sequence shall be created when:
1. there's a conflict in a UTXO branch.
2. the UTXO branches are aggregated.
3. UTXO branches are merged.

Each new Marker-Sequence shall start with a new Marker. 

Whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created, the Marker tool shall assign:
- a new `SID`, created by the rule $new\texttt{SID}=1+last SID$. A new created `SID` must be unique. 
- a new $\texttt{SR}=1+max(\text{referenced }\texttt{SR})$. 
To prevent assigning a new `SID` when combining the same Marker-Sequences at different times, the Marker tool shall build parent-child relationships in a map whenever a new Marker-Sequence is created. 


### 4.7.4.2 Update on double spends

If a transaction arrives that double spends an already booked transaction, a new Marker-Sequence shall be created. For the Markers DAG and Message DAG several scenarios can occur.  

In the simplest case the already existing transaction does not have any future Markers assigned. Thus it becomes a Marker itself. 
Second, the already booked transaction has assigned a Marker already. Then the existing Marker-Sequences gets re-mapped starting from that Marker.
Third, if the double spend is with a transaction that is already booked but is not a marker itself, the Marker tool shall not create a new Marker for that value message. The transaction and all messages in between the transaction and the future Markers shall be mapped individually to the new Marker-Sequence.

## 4.7.5 Message Metadata

For each message in the Tangle, the Marker tool shall maintain metadata that provides information about the Markers that are closest in the past or future cone of that message, as well as whether the message itself is a Marker and what rank the message has. The following message metadata shall be defined in the Marker tool to support that requirement:

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Type</th>
        <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>IsMarker</code></td>
        <td>bool</td>
        <td>A flag to indicate whether a message is a Marker.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>PastMarkers</code></td>
        <td>map[<code>SID</code>]<code>MID</code></td>
        <td>A list of the closest Markers from different Marker-Sequences in the past cone of the message.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>FutureMarkers</code></td>
        <td>map[<code>SID</code>]<code>MID</code></td>
        <td>A list of the closest Markers from different Marker-Sequences in the future cone of the message.</td>     
    </tr>
</table>
<br>

The `PastMarkers` field contains 
* only the Marker identifier of itself, if the message is marked as a Marker.
* the Marker identifier of its closest PastMarkers (PMs), i.e. from each referenced Marker-Sequence only the Markers with the highest Marker Rank (`MR`). Markers which are referenced by other Markers in this list shall be removed.

The `FutureMarkers` (FM) list shall be empty at the start and shall be updated when a new Marker directly or indirectly references that list. 

The propagation of a FM to its past cone (i.e. the update of the `FutureMarkers` list in the encountered messages) shall not continue beyond a message if:

1. `FutureMarkers` of a message includes a previous Marker of the same Marker-Sequence; the message that includes such a Marker shall not get updated.
2. the message is the Marker in a different Marker-Sequence. Then the `FutureMarkers` shall be updated for that Marker only.

Through this approach past and future Markers do not cross weak parents.

## 4.7.6 Marker Application Description

Figure 1 shows an example of how the Markers and Marker-Sequences (here also called Sequence) would look in the Tangle from the perspective of the Message DAG, the Marker DAG and the Marker-Sequence DAG. The purple colored messages are Markers:

![](https://i.imgur.com/GENej3O.png)

**Figure 1: Markers and Marker-Sequences in the Tangle**

### 4.7.6.1 Example Implementation

An illustrative example of the Markers tool in action is provided [here](https://github.com/iotaledger/goshimmer/blob/develop/packages/tangle/images/TestBookerMarkerMappings.md) for the prototype implementation. 

### 4.7.6.2 Approval weight approximation

To approximate the approval weight of a message, the Markers tool retrieves the approval weight of `FutureMarkers`. Since a given message is in the past cone of its FMs, the approval weight and thus the finality of the message will be at least the same as the maximum weight of its FMs. This gives a lower bound (which is the “safe” bound), and if the Markers are set frequently enough, this provides a good approximation of that bound. 

### 4.7.6.3 Past cone check

By comparing the `PastMarkers` of a message with the `FutureMarkers` of another message, the Markers tool can determine if that message is in the past cone of the other. For example, consider two messages `X` and `Y` that are members in the same Marker-Sequence. Then if `PM(X)>FM(Y)`, then `X` is in the future of `Y`.

One way in which this check can be carried out is by traversing the Marker DAG while remaining in the bounds of the Marker ranks. 

A potential optimization is that the Marker-Sequence DAG can be traversed while considering the Marker-Sequence ranks, prior to any traversal of the Marker DAG.

It is possible that the Marker DAG does not cover certain areas of the message DAG at a given point in time. In this case, a check on this question can return one of the following three values:

* `True` 
* `False` 
* `Maybe`

If the check returns a `Maybe`, then the Message DAG must be searched via a search algorithm.



For an example implementation of the algorithm for the Past cone check visit [GoShimmer Markers](https://github.com/iotaledger/goshimmer/blob/develop/docs/specification/003-markers.md).
