5.1 Fast Probabilistic Consensus.md, before:

# 5.1 Fast Probabilistic Consensus

The functionality defined in this part of the specification allows nodes to find consensus on whether a given object is valid or not. This protocol, called Fast Probabilistic Consensus (FPC), is triggered if the validity of an object is uncertain. Please refer to Section 6.1. (Object of Consensus) for details. 

Once FPC is triggered every node shall come to an initial opinion on the validity of the object, as described in Section ?. The node shall then start to query other nodes about their opinions on the given object and shall update its opinion according to the rules specified in this section. 

This procedure shall halt locally if a node has not changed its opinion over a specified period of time or if some maximal amount of rounds is reached. 

Unlike other voting-based consensus protocols, FPC uses a sequence of global random thresholds. This randomness makes FPC robust in Byzantine environment. We refer to [FPC-BI: Fast Probabilistic Consensus within Byzantine Infrastructures](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10895), [Robustness and efficiency of leaderless probabilistic consensus protocols within Byzantine infrastructures](https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08787), and [Fast Probabilistic Consensus with Weighted Votes](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-63089-8_24) for more details on FPC.

# 5.1.1 FPC Protocol

The FPC protocol attempts to determine consensus on the validity of an object `objectID`. Every node has an initial opinion `Opinion` on this object. These opinions are updated in rounds until the protocol terminates using a local stopping rule. 

## 5.1.1.1 FPC parameters
Table 5.1-1 gives a list of all parameters required for FPC.

**Table 5.1-1 Parameters Required for FPC**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `TotalRoundsFinalization` | integer | Number of consecutive rounds before FPC auto-terminates|
| `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` | integer | Number of consecutive rounds with non-random threshold|
| `FirstRoundThreshold` | double | Threshold of the proportion of opinions in the first round|
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold`| double |  Lower random threshold bound in subsequent rounds|
| `SubsequentRoundsUpperBoundThreshold` |double |  Upper random threshold bound in subsequent rounds|
| `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` | double | Threshold for finalization phase|
| `MaxRound` | integer | Maximum number of rounds before querying stops|
|`QuerySize` | integer | Quorum size, number of nodes that are queried|
|`RoundLength` | double | Duration (in seconds) of a round|
|`TimeOut` | double  | Maximal waiting time (in seconds) to receive answers for FPC queries|
|`MinManaProportion`| double | Minimal amount of mana of received answers that allow to update opinion. If this amount is not reached the current round is not counted. 

The default values of the parameters are (Table 5.1-2):

**Table 5.1-2 FPC Parameter Default Values**

| Parameter  |      Value     |
|----------|:-------------:|
| `TotalRoundsFinalization` | 10  |
| `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` |  3     |
| `FirstRoundThreshold` | 0.67|
| `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` | 0.5 |
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold` | 0.50 |
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold`| 0.67|
| `MaxRound`|100 |
|` QuerySize` | 21|
| `RoundLength`| 10 * time.Seconds |
| `TimeOut` | 6500 * time.Millisecond |
| `MinManaProportion`| 0.50 |



## 5.1.1.2 Local variables

Local variables are those which may be defined at the application developer's discretion and do not form a mandatory part of the protocol. They are included here to assist in understanding the protocol defined in this section. The kind of information described for these variables must be handled by the node application in some form.

The opinion `Opinion` of a node on an object `objectID` of type string is described by the following enumerated type: 

```
Opinion: {
    DISLIKE: 0,
    LIKE: 1,
    NULL: NULL  #The node does not know about the object,
    NA : NA # a node does not receive an answer of the opinion of another node
}
```
If the eventual opinion of an object after FPC is `LIKE` the node must consider this object to be part of the tangle. 
>[Seb] Please refer to Section Objects of Voting and Approval Switch for more details

Every node shall keep the following variables (Table 5.1-3):

**Table 5.1-3 Required Node Variables**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `nodeList` |list of nodeIDs | list of known nodes|
| `consensusManaList` | list of nodeIDs  | list of active consensus mana of known nodes|
| `ownMana`| double | active consensus mana of `ownNode`|
| `rn` |double | random number provided by dRNG module|
|`rnCycle`| double | random number instance (see X.X.X.X)|
| `queryList` | list of nodeIDs | list of nodes to query|
|`queryMax`| integer | maximal number of queries per round|
| `opinionQuery` | list of Opinions  | list of opinions of nodes in `queryList`, non-replies are encoded with `NA`|
| `objectIDs` | list of objectIDs | list of objectIDs that are under vote|

Note that `consensusManaList` is a list of active consensus mana of all known nodes. As this mana changes over time this list has to be updated over time. Such an update is expressed with the function `GetActiveConsensuMana(time)` that returns the list of active consensus mana at time `time`.

For each `objectID` that is under vote a node shall keep the following variables (Table 5.1-4):

**Table 5.1-4 Variables Required for objectID Under Vote**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `opinion` | Opinion | opinion of the validity the `objectID`|
| `cnt` | integer | counter of the number of consecutive rounds with unchanged opinion|
| `queryStatus` | boolean | status if actively querying|
| `answerStatus` | boolean | `TRUE` if answering queries, otherwise `FALSE`|
| `round` | integer | counter for the number of rounds in FPC|
| `reachedMaxRound` | boolean | indicating whether protocol reached `MaxRound` before auto-termination, default value `FALSE`|


The `objectID`s of objects that are currently voted on are kept in a list `objectIDs`.

## 5.1.1.3 FPC protocol description

### 5.1.1.3.1 FPC Protocol Operation for One Object ID

This section describes how FPC works for one `objectID`. Once FCP is triggered on the validity of the object `objectID` a node establishes an initial opinion `opinion` on `objectID`, see Section 6.1.  The exchange and update of opinions must be done in rounds of length `RoundLength`. Rounds end and start at times (in seconds) that are multiple of `RoundLength`. At the beginning of each round a node must query a random sample of the other nodes and either send a query request or check the tangle if the sampled nodes published their opinions on the tangle. After `TimeOut` the node must calculate a weighted (by active consensus mana) mean of the received opinions. At the end of the round it must set a threshold. In the first round this threshold is `FirstRoundThreshold` while in the subsequent rounds a node must retrieve a random threshold from the dRNG. If the weighted mean is below this obtained threshold it must set its opinion to `DISLIKE`, otherwise it must set its opinion to `LIKE`. In the case that the opinion did not change, the variable `cnt` must be incremented by 1, otherwise it must be set to 0. If a node did not receive enough answers, i.e., the proportion of mana of the received opinions is less than `MinManaProportion`, the round is not counted, i.e., neither opinion nor `cnt` are changed. This continues until `cnt`=`TotalRoundsFinalization`-`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold`. FPC then enters in the "finalization phase" and continues for `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` rounds using the `FixedThreshold` instead of the random threshold. If during this phase a node changes its opinions it must set `cnt`=0 and use the random threshold again. The node shall stop querying if `cnt`=`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` or `cnt`=`reachedMaxRound`.

>[Seb] A node must set its final opinion to the outcome of the FPC, see Section 6.?
 A node must reply to incoming queries for a given `objectID` up to `reachedMaxRound`*`RoundLength` after FPC was triggered for this `objectID`.

In case that `cnt`=`reachedMaxRound` a node must set the final opinion to `DISLIKE`. 

### 5.1.1.3.2 FPC Protocol Operation for Multiple Object IDs

It is possible that there are more than one objects to vote on. In this case, a node shall sample once per round and obtain the opinions for all objects. Malicious or faulty nodes may not reply in a consistent way. In particular, in the case of a double spend, a  malicious node may reply `LIKE` for two or more conflicting objects. These malicious messages shall be filtered after having received the responses of the queries. Therefore, upon receival of the opinions, a node shall check for every sampled node if its answers are consistent, i.e., all liked objects must form a valid ledger state. Nodes that replied inconsistently shall be filtered out and their answer shall be considered as not received, i.e., they do not count for the mana of received opinions neither are used for the calculation of the weighted mean. 

High consensus mana nodes will be queried more often than nodes with low mana.  Every node is given the possibility to publish their opinions in a statement on the tangle. These message are called FPC statements. Nodes who decide to gossip may close the port reserved for FPC queries. A close port can therefore be an indication that a node decided to disseminate its opinions through statements. Every node shall keep a list of nodes that are not answering direct queries but publish their opinions on the tangle. If a node issues two or more conflicting FPC statements in a round, every other node shall not take these messages into account, i.e., they do not count for the mana of received opinions neither are used for the calculation of the weighted mean.

Note that since mana changes over time, it may well be that FPC may use different mana for different `objectID`s that are voted on at the same time. For an `objectID`, FPC must use the mana list `consensusManaList` obtained by `GetActiveConsensuMana(timeObjectID)`, where  `timeObjectID` is the timestamp `ObjectID`.

## 5.1.1.4 FPC Pseudocode Description

The following presents some pseudo-code for a better understanding of the details of the FPC Protocol. 

The function `GetRN(a, b, time)` retrieves a uniform random number between between a and b from the dRNG module.

>[Seb] to be discussed/related with DRNG, Be more precise on the source of randomness

In each round a node must query a random sample of other nodes. The random sample is obtained using weighted (by active consensus mana) sampling with replacement until `QuerySize` distinct elements are chosen. 


### `GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)`
This function chooses a sample of nodeIDs for FPC queries.
```
queryList = []
WHILE (queryList does not contain QuerySize different elements)
    newSample = SAMPLE(nodeList, weight=mana, replacement=TRUE)
    queryList = CONCAT(queryList, newSample)
RETURN queryList
```
Once the list `queryList` of nodes to query is chosen a node must obtain their opinions about the objects under voting. As there are two possibilities for nodes to communicate their opinions, via direct answers or via FPC statements, a node shall keep information on this behavior up to date. 


At the beginning of each round every node must prepare a query message and send it to those nodes in `queryList` that replies directly (i.e., do not publish FPC statements). 

Query messages must follow the following layout. It is a concatenation of the elements of `objectIDs`:

### QueryRequest
| Name | Type | Description |
| -----|------ | ----------- |
|QueriesID | repeated string   | unlisted objectIDs |


The reply to a QueryRequest must take follow the following form 
### QueryReply

| Name | Type | Description |
| -----|------ | ----------- |
| repliedOpinions | repeated Opinion   | Opinions on queried objects in the same order as in QueryRequest |

Note that since the order of the opinions in QueryReply is important a node may have to produce different messages QueryReply for different querying nodes.  Both messages, QueryRequest and QueryReply, must be signed by the sending node. The communication channel for these messages is specified in the field "services" in the DiscoveryRequest, see Section 2.1 Peer Discovery. 



### `GetOpinion(objectIDs, queryList, TimeOut)`
This function sends queries to all nodes of `queryList` and obtains their opinion either through QueryReply messages of from FPC statements on the tangle. 
```pascal
SEND QueryRequest messages
WAIT UNTIL TimeOut  
FOR (node in queryList)
    IF (node replied) 
        opinionQuery[node, objectIDs] = reply[node, objectIDs]
    ELSE IF (node publishes on tangle)
        opinionQuery[node, objectIDs]=getOpinionFromTangle[node, objectID]
    ELSE opinionQuery[node, objectIDs]= NA
RETURN (opinionQuery)
```
A node must receive a sufficient amount of replies to validate a given round; otherwise the ongoing FPC round is skipped. More precisely, the mana of the received opinions must be larger than `MinManaProportion` times the sum of the mana of the sampled nodes. 

### `CheckQuerySuccessful(opinionID, queryList, opinionQuery, MinManaProportion)`
This function checks if a node received sufficiently many answers such that the ongoing round can be considered.
```pascal
manaList = GetActiveConsensusMana(timeObjectID)
queriedMana = SUM(manaList[queryList])
answerMana = 0
FOR node IN queryList
    IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] != NA
        answerMana += manaList[node]
IF answerMana>= MinManaProportion * queriedMana
   querySuccessful = TRUE
ELSE
    querySuccessful = FALSE
RETURN querySuccessful
```

Once a node receives a FPC query it must prepare a response message as specified above, and shall sent the reply as soon as possible. If a node decides to publish its opinions on the tangle, it must create a so-called FPC statement message and issue it on the tangle at the beginning of each round. 

At the end of each round, i.e., after the `TimeOut` expires,  a node must update its opinion if `CheckQuerySuccessful` is TRUE. The node must calculate the mana weighted mean of the obtained opinion and compare it to a certain threshold. The value of the threshold depends on the phase FPC is in. In the first round a node must use `FirstRoundThreshold` as threshold, while in the subsequent rounds the node must use a random threshold obtained by `GetRN()`. Moreover, if `cnt`>`TotalRoundsFinalization`-`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` the node must use `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` for the threshold. 
The following pseudo-code describes the update of the opinion of one given `objectID`. It uses `queryList` and `opinionQuery` that may be obtained by the functions `GetSample` and `GetOpinion`. The variable `opinion` describes the current opinion on `objectID`.

### `OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)`
This function updates the opinion of a node on `objectID`.
```pascal
manaList = GetActiveConsensusMana(timeObjectID)
IF !CheckQuerySuccessful(queryList, opinionQuery))
    newOpinion = opinion # 
ELSE 
    answerMana = 0
    etaStar = 0
    FOR node in queryList
        IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] != NA
        answerMana += manaList[node]
        IF  opinionQuery[node, objectID] == LIKE
            etaStar += manaList[node]
        IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] == DISLIKE
            etaStar -= manaList[node]
    eta = (opinion*ownMana + etaStar*(answerMana-ownMana))/answerMana 
    WAIT until next ongoing round ends
    IF round == 1  
        threshold = FirstRoundThreshold
    ELSE IF round <= TotalRoundsFinalization-TotalRoundsFixedThreshold 
        threshold = getRN(SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold, SubsequentRoundsUpperBoundThreshold, currentTime)  
    ELSE 
        threshold = EndingRoundsFixedThreshold
    IF (eta < threshold)
        newOpinion = DISLIKE
    ELSE
        newOpinion = LIKE
RETURN newOpinion 
```
The next function describes the FPC for one `objectID`. It is triggered once  `queryStatus` of an object is set to `TRUE`.

>[Seb] Check details with Objects of Voting spec

### `mainFPC(objectId, queryStatus)`
This function describes the FPC protocol for a node and a given `objectID`
```pascal
IF queryStatus == TRUE  
    opinion = GetInitialOpinion(objectID)
    cnt = 0
}
WAIT until next round starts
round = 1 
queryList = GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)
opinionQuery = GetOpinion(objectID, queryList, TimeOut)
opinionNew = OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)
IF opinion == opinionNew 
    cnt++
ELSE
    cnt=0
opinion = opinionNew
round++
WHILE queryStatus
    queryList = GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)
    opinionQuery = GetOpinion(objectID, queryList, TimeOut) 
    opinionNew = OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)
    IF opinion == opinionNew 
        cnt++
    ELSE 
        cnt=1
    opinion = opinionNew
    round++
    IF cnt == TotalRoundsFinalization 
        queryStatus =FALSE
    IF round >= MaxRound 
        queryStatus =FALSE
        opinion = 1

RETURN opinion
```



# 5.1.5 Possible Optimizations
The design given above exemplifies all the mandatory elements of the FPC Protocol.

There are several possible ways to optimize the performance of FPC. For example:

- FPC exposes the public IP of all the IOTA nodes. This can be limited by publishing statements on tangle. However, if all nodes decide to publish their statement this may have a negative effect on the scalability of the protocol. Please refer to [Fast Probabilistic Consensus with Weighted Votes](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-63089-8_24) for more discussions on how to optimize the message overhead.
- Monotonicity and and consistency rules may be applied to reduce the sizes of the messages.
- In the case that FPC is used on validity of messages it is possible to use a symmetric range of the random threshold, `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold=beta, SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold=1-beta` for some `beta`. This may allow the node application to increase the support of the random threshold (and hence robustness against an attacker) without endangering the liveness of honest messages. 
- The choice of the FPC parameters could be optimized. The optimal choice depends on the actual mana distribution and network latency.

Commit message:

revised introduction and WAIT until round starts

5.1 Fast Probabilistic Consensus.md, after:

# 5.1 Fast Probabilistic Consensus

The functionality defined in this part of the specification allows nodes to find consensus on whether a given object is valid or not. This protocol, called Fast Probabilistic Consensus (FPC), is triggered if the validity of an object is uncertain. These objects can be messages or transactions. Please refer to Section 6.1. (Object of Consensus) for details. 

Once FPC is triggered every node shall come to an initial opinion on the validity of the object, as described in Section 6.1. The node shall then start to query other nodes about their opinions on the given object and shall update its opinion according to the rules specified in this section. 

This procedure shall halt locally if a node has not changed its opinion over a specified period of time or if some maximal amount of rounds is reached. 

Unlike other voting-based consensus protocols, FPC uses a sequence of global random thresholds. This randomness makes FPC robust in Byzantine environment. We refer to [FPC-BI: Fast Probabilistic Consensus within Byzantine Infrastructures](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10895), [Robustness and efficiency of leaderless probabilistic consensus protocols within Byzantine infrastructures](https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08787), and [Fast Probabilistic Consensus with Weighted Votes](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-63089-8_24) for more details on FPC.

# 5.1.1 FPC Protocol

The FPC protocol attempts to determine consensus on the validity of an object `objectID`. Every node has an initial opinion `opinion` on this object. These opinions are updated in rounds until the protocol terminates using a local stopping rule. 

## 5.1.1.1 FPC parameters
Table 5.1-1 gives a list of all parameters required for FPC.

**Table 5.1-1 Parameters Required for FPC**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `TotalRoundsFinalization` | integer | Number of consecutive rounds before FPC auto-terminates|
| `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` | integer | Number of consecutive rounds with non-random threshold|
| `FirstRoundThreshold` | double | Threshold of the proportion of opinions in the first round|
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold`| double |  Lower random threshold bound in subsequent rounds|
| `SubsequentRoundsUpperBoundThreshold` |double |  Upper random threshold bound in subsequent rounds|
| `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` | double | Threshold for finalization phase|
| `MaxRound` | integer | Maximum number of rounds before querying stops|
|`QuerySize` | integer | Quorum size, number of nodes that are queried|
|`RoundLength` | double | Duration (in seconds) of a round|
|`TimeOut` | double  | Maximal waiting time (in seconds) to receive answers for FPC queries|
|`MinManaProportion`| double | Minimal amount of mana of received answers that allow to update opinion. If this amount is not reached the current round is not counted. 

The default values of the parameters are (Table 5.1-2):

**Table 5.1-2 FPC Parameter Default Values**

| Parameter  |      Value     |
|----------|:-------------:|
| `TotalRoundsFinalization` | 10  |
| `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` |  3     |
| `FirstRoundThreshold` | 0.67|
| `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` | 0.5 |
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold` | 0.50 |
| `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold`| 0.67|
| `MaxRound`|100 |
|` QuerySize` | 21|
| `RoundLength`| 10 * time.Seconds |
| `TimeOut` | 6500 * time.Millisecond |
| `MinManaProportion`| 0.50 |



## 5.1.1.2 Local variables

Local variables are those which may be defined at the application developer's discretion and do not form a mandatory part of the protocol. They are included here to assist in understanding the protocol defined in this section. The kind of information described for these variables must be handled by the node application in some form.

The opinion `Opinion` of a node on an object `objectID` of type string is described by the following enumerated type: 

```
Opinion: {
    DISLIKE: 0,
    LIKE: 1,
    NULL: NULL  #The node does not know about the object,
    NA : NA # a node does not receive an answer of the opinion of another node
}
```
If the eventual opinion of an object after FPC is `LIKE` the node must consider this object to be part of the tangle. 
>[Seb] Please refer to Section Objects of Voting and Approval Switch for more details

Every node shall keep the following variables (Table 5.1-3):

**Table 5.1-3 Required Node Variables**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `nodeList` |list of nodeIDs | list of known nodes|
| `consensusManaList` | list of nodeIDs  | list of active consensus mana of known nodes|
| `ownMana`| double | active consensus mana of `ownNode`|
| `rn` |double | random number provided by dRNG module|
|`rnCycle`| double | random number instance (see X.X.X.X)|
| `queryList` | list of nodeIDs | list of nodes to query|
|`queryMax`| integer | maximal number of queries per round|
| `opinionQuery` | list of Opinions  | list of opinions of nodes in `queryList`, non-replies are encoded with `NA`|
| `objectIDs` | list of objectIDs | list of objectIDs that are under vote|

Note that `consensusManaList` is a list of active consensus mana of all known nodes. As this mana changes over time this list has to be updated over time. Such an update is expressed with the function `GetActiveConsensuMana(time)` that returns the list of active consensus mana at time `time`.

For each `objectID` that is under vote a node shall keep the following variables (Table 5.1-4):

**Table 5.1-4 Variables Required for objectID Under Vote**

| Name | Type |Description |
| -----| ------ | ----------- |
| `opinion` | Opinion | opinion of the validity the `objectID`|
| `cnt` | integer | counter of the number of consecutive rounds with unchanged opinion|
| `queryStatus` | boolean | status if actively querying|
| `answerStatus` | boolean | `TRUE` if answering queries, otherwise `FALSE`|
| `round` | integer | counter for the number of rounds in FPC|
| `reachedMaxRound` | boolean | indicating whether protocol reached `MaxRound` before auto-termination, default value `FALSE`|


The `objectID`s of objects that are currently voted on are kept in a list `objectIDs`.

## 5.1.1.3 FPC protocol description

### 5.1.1.3.1 FPC Protocol Operation for One Object ID

This section describes how FPC works for one `objectID`. Once FCP is triggered on the validity of the object `objectID` a node establishes an initial opinion `opinion` on `objectID`, see Section 6.1.  The exchange and update of opinions must be done in rounds of length `RoundLength`. Rounds end and start at times (in seconds) that are multiple of `RoundLength`. At the beginning of each round a node must query a random sample of the other nodes and either send a query request or check the tangle if the sampled nodes published their opinions on the tangle. After `TimeOut` the node must calculate a weighted (by active consensus mana) mean of the received opinions. At the end of the round it must set a threshold. In the first round this threshold is `FirstRoundThreshold` while in the subsequent rounds a node must retrieve a random threshold from the dRNG. If the weighted mean is below this obtained threshold it must set its opinion to `DISLIKE`, otherwise it must set its opinion to `LIKE`. In the case that the opinion did not change, the variable `cnt` must be incremented by 1, otherwise it must be set to 0. If a node did not receive enough answers, i.e., the proportion of mana of the received opinions is less than `MinManaProportion`, the round is not counted, i.e., neither opinion nor `cnt` are changed. This continues until `cnt`=`TotalRoundsFinalization`-`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold`. FPC then enters in the "finalization phase" and continues for `TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` rounds using the `FixedThreshold` instead of the random threshold. If during this phase a node changes its opinions it must set `cnt`=0 and use the random threshold again. The node shall stop querying if `cnt`=`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` or `cnt`=`reachedMaxRound`.

>[Seb] A node must set its final opinion to the outcome of the FPC, see Section 6.?
 A node must reply to incoming queries for a given `objectID` up to `reachedMaxRound`*`RoundLength` after FPC was triggered for this `objectID`.

In case that `cnt`=`reachedMaxRound` a node must set the final opinion to `DISLIKE`. 

### 5.1.1.3.2 FPC Protocol Operation for Multiple Object IDs

It is possible that there are more than one objects to vote on. In this case, a node shall sample once per round and obtain the opinions for all objects. Malicious or faulty nodes may not reply in a consistent way. In particular, in the case of a double spend, a  malicious node may reply `LIKE` for two or more conflicting objects. These malicious messages shall be filtered after having received the responses of the queries. Therefore, upon receival of the opinions, a node shall check for every sampled node if its answers are consistent, i.e., all liked objects must form a valid ledger state. Nodes that replied inconsistently shall be filtered out and their answer shall be considered as not received, i.e., they do not count for the mana of received opinions neither are used for the calculation of the weighted mean. 

High consensus mana nodes will be queried more often than nodes with low mana.  Every node is given the possibility to publish their opinions in a statement on the tangle. These message are called FPC statements. Nodes who decide to gossip may close the port reserved for FPC queries. A close port can therefore be an indication that a node decided to disseminate its opinions through statements. Every node shall keep a list of nodes that are not answering direct queries but publish their opinions on the tangle. If a node issues two or more conflicting FPC statements in a round, every other node shall not take these messages into account, i.e., they do not count for the mana of received opinions neither are used for the calculation of the weighted mean.

Note that since mana changes over time, it may well be that FPC may use different mana for different `objectID`s that are voted on at the same time. For an `objectID`, FPC must use the mana list `consensusManaList` obtained by `GetActiveConsensuMana(timeObjectID)`, where  `timeObjectID` is the timestamp `ObjectID`.

## 5.1.1.4 FPC Pseudocode Description

The following presents some pseudo-code for a better understanding of the details of the FPC Protocol. 

The function `GetRN(a, b, time)` retrieves a uniform random number between between a and b from the dRNG module.

>[Seb] to be discussed/related with DRNG, Be more precise on the source of randomness

In each round a node must query a random sample of other nodes. The random sample is obtained using weighted (by active consensus mana) sampling with replacement until `QuerySize` distinct elements are chosen. 


### `GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)`
This function chooses a sample of nodeIDs for FPC queries.
```
queryList = []
WHILE (queryList does not contain QuerySize different elements)
    newSample = SAMPLE(nodeList, weight=mana, replacement=TRUE)
    queryList = CONCAT(queryList, newSample)
RETURN queryList
```
Once the list `queryList` of nodes to query is chosen a node must obtain their opinions about the objects under voting. As there are two possibilities for nodes to communicate their opinions, via direct answers or via FPC statements, a node shall keep information on this behavior up to date. 


At the beginning of each round every node must prepare a query message and send it to those nodes in `queryList` that replies directly (i.e., do not publish FPC statements). 

Query messages must follow the following layout. It is a concatenation of the elements of `objectIDs`:

### QueryRequest
| Name | Type | Description |
| -----|------ | ----------- |
|QueriesID | repeated string   | unlisted objectIDs |


The reply to a QueryRequest must take follow the following form 
### QueryReply

| Name | Type | Description |
| -----|------ | ----------- |
| repliedOpinions | repeated Opinion   | Opinions on queried objects in the same order as in QueryRequest |

Note that since the order of the opinions in QueryReply is important a node may have to produce different messages QueryReply for different querying nodes.  Both messages, QueryRequest and QueryReply, must be signed by the sending node. The communication channel for these messages is specified in the field "services" in the DiscoveryRequest, see Section 2.1 Peer Discovery. 



### `GetOpinion(objectIDs, queryList, TimeOut)`
This function sends queries to all nodes of `queryList` and obtains their opinion either through QueryReply messages of from FPC statements on the tangle. 
```pascal
SEND QueryRequest messages
WAIT UNTIL TimeOut  
FOR (node in queryList)
    IF (node replied) 
        opinionQuery[node, objectIDs] = reply[node, objectIDs]
    ELSE IF (node publishes on tangle)
        opinionQuery[node, objectIDs]=getOpinionFromTangle[node, objectID]
    ELSE opinionQuery[node, objectIDs]= NA
RETURN (opinionQuery)
```
A node must receive a sufficient amount of replies to validate a given round; otherwise the ongoing FPC round is skipped. More precisely, the mana of the received opinions must be larger than `MinManaProportion` times the sum of the mana of the sampled nodes. 

### `CheckQuerySuccessful(opinionID, queryList, opinionQuery, MinManaProportion)`
This function checks if a node received sufficiently many answers such that the ongoing round can be considered.
```pascal
manaList = GetActiveConsensusMana(timeObjectID)
queriedMana = SUM(manaList[queryList])
answerMana = 0
FOR node IN queryList
    IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] != NA
        answerMana += manaList[node]
IF answerMana>= MinManaProportion * queriedMana
   querySuccessful = TRUE
ELSE
    querySuccessful = FALSE
RETURN querySuccessful
```

Once a node receives a FPC query it must prepare a response message as specified above, and shall sent the reply as soon as possible. If a node decides to publish its opinions on the tangle, it must create a so-called FPC statement message and issue it on the tangle at the beginning of each round. 

At the end of each round, i.e., after the `TimeOut` expires,  a node must update its opinion if `CheckQuerySuccessful` is TRUE. The node must calculate the mana weighted mean of the obtained opinion and compare it to a certain threshold. The value of the threshold depends on the phase FPC is in. In the first round a node must use `FirstRoundThreshold` as threshold, while in the subsequent rounds the node must use a random threshold obtained by `GetRN()`. Moreover, if `cnt`>`TotalRoundsFinalization`-`TotalRoundsFixedThreshold` the node must use `EndingRoundsFixedThreshold` for the threshold. 
The following pseudo-code describes the update of the opinion of one given `objectID`. It uses `queryList` and `opinionQuery` that may be obtained by the functions `GetSample` and `GetOpinion`. The variable `opinion` describes the current opinion on `objectID`.

### `OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)`
This function updates the opinion of a node on `objectID`.
```pascal
manaList = GetActiveConsensusMana(timeObjectID)
IF !CheckQuerySuccessful(queryList, opinionQuery))
    newOpinion = opinion # 
ELSE 
    answerMana = 0
    etaStar = 0
    FOR node in queryList
        IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] != NA
        answerMana += manaList[node]
        IF  opinionQuery[node, objectID] == LIKE
            etaStar += manaList[node]
        IF opinionQuery[node, objectID] == DISLIKE
            etaStar -= manaList[node]
    eta = (opinion*ownMana + etaStar*(answerMana-ownMana))/answerMana 
    WAIT until next ongoing round ends
    IF round == 1  
        threshold = FirstRoundThreshold
    ELSE IF round <= TotalRoundsFinalization-TotalRoundsFixedThreshold 
        threshold = getRN(SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold, SubsequentRoundsUpperBoundThreshold, currentTime)  
    ELSE 
        threshold = EndingRoundsFixedThreshold
    IF (eta < threshold)
        newOpinion = DISLIKE
    ELSE
        newOpinion = LIKE
RETURN newOpinion 
```
The next function describes the FPC for one `objectID`. It is triggered once  `queryStatus` of an object is set to `TRUE`.

>[Seb] Check details with Objects of Voting spec

### `mainFPC(objectId, queryStatus)`
This function describes the FPC protocol for a node and a given `objectID`
```pascal
IF queryStatus == TRUE  
    opinion = GetInitialOpinion(objectID)
    cnt = 0
}
WAIT until currentTime/RoundLength IS INTEGER
round = 1 
queryList = GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)
opinionQuery = GetOpinion(objectID, queryList, TimeOut)
opinionNew = OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)
IF opinion == opinionNew 
    cnt++
ELSE
    cnt=0
opinion = opinionNew
round++
WHILE queryStatus
    queryList = GetSample(QuerySize, nodeList, manaList)
    opinionQuery = GetOpinion(objectID, queryList, TimeOut) 
    opinionNew = OpinionUpdate(objectID, opinion, queryList, opinionQuery, round)
    IF opinion == opinionNew 
        cnt++
    ELSE 
        cnt=1
    opinion = opinionNew
    round++
    IF cnt == TotalRoundsFinalization 
        queryStatus =FALSE
    IF round >= MaxRound 
        queryStatus =FALSE
        opinion = 1

RETURN opinion
```



# 5.1.5 Possible Optimizations
The design given above exemplifies all the mandatory elements of the FPC Protocol.

There are several possible ways to optimize the performance of FPC. For example:

- FPC exposes the public IP of all the IOTA nodes. This can be limited by publishing statements on tangle. However, if all nodes decide to publish their statement this may have a negative effect on the scalability of the protocol. Please refer to [Fast Probabilistic Consensus with Weighted Votes](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-63089-8_24) for more discussions on how to optimize the message overhead.
- Monotonicity and and consistency rules may be applied to reduce the sizes of the messages.
- In the case that FPC is used on validity of messages it is possible to use a symmetric range of the random threshold, `SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold=beta, SubsequentRoundsLowerBoundThreshold=1-beta` for some `beta`. This may allow the node application to increase the support of the random threshold (and hence robustness against an attacker) without endangering the liveness of honest messages. 
- The choice of the FPC parameters could be optimized. The optimal choice depends on the actual mana distribution and network latency.
