7.1 Snapshot.md, before:

# 7.1 Snapshot

## 7.1.1 Introduction
This section defines the *Snapshot* protocol.


## 7.1.2 Dependencies
The *Snapshotting* protocol depends on:

+ Timestamps: Core module to enable pruning.
+ Tip Selection Algorithm: No messages can be referenced for the part of the Tangle that is being pruned.
+ UTXO: Transactions whose outputs are unspent remain after the snapshot.
+ Branches: We require that the at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.
+ Markers: We require that the part of the Tangle being pruned is not actively dependent on Markers any more. 
+ Approval weight: We require that the approval weight is concluded at a time much before messages reach the pruning age.
+ Voting: We require that any voting is concluded much before messages reach the pruning age. 
+ Data flow: The past cone check must be relaxed (???TODO)


## 7.1.3 Proof of Inclusion and Pruning

In order to keep the ledger concise data that is sufficiently far in the past can be removed. We call this process pruning. Thus the IOTA protocol for a standard node does not attempt to keep all information back until the genesis. Rather the protocol effectively becomes a filter mechanism to proof whether a certain message was at some point in the past included in the ledger. This can be done e.g. through a Merkel tree proof. 

Transactions are a special type of message, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimisation of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is ommited in this first iteration of the protocol.

## 7.1.5 Pruning dependencies

We require several conditions to be fullfilled in order to allow for a smooth pruning process. Pruning is done when messages reach the age `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both voting on timestamps and conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or `rejectedBranch`. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or rejected. 

Transaction must pass a past cone check, see [### 2.4.4.6 Booker - Point 7.](./2.4%20Data%20Flow.md/#2.4.4.6%20Booker). However the past cone check cannot apply to messages below a certain age `DELTA_PASTCHECK<<DELTA_PRUNE`. Thus the past cone check there needs to be relaxed (???TODO).

With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. 

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

Once a message reaches the age `DELTA_PRUNE` several checks are performed:

+ If the message is a data message it can be removed. 
+ If the message is a value message and is rejected, i.e. is member of the `rejectedBranch` it can be removed.
+ If the message is a value messages and is confirmed, i.e. is member of the `masterBranch` it is checked, whether any of the outputs is unspent. 
+ If all are spent the value message is removed. 
+ If any of the outputs is unspent, the message gets stored in a new field called `genesis`.

Commit message:

add confirmedSpent field, add post pruning process

7.1 Snapshot.md, after:

# 7.1 Snapshot

## 7.1.1 Introduction
This section defines the *Snapshot* protocol.


## 7.1.2 Dependencies
The *Snapshotting* protocol depends on:

+ Timestamps: Core module to enable pruning.
+ Tip Selection Algorithm: No messages can be referenced for the part of the Tangle that is being pruned.
+ UTXO: Transactions whose outputs are unspent remain after the snapshot.
+ Branches: We require that the at the point of pruning only master branch and rejected branch exist.
+ Markers: We require that the part of the Tangle being pruned is not actively dependent on Markers any more. 
+ Approval weight: We require that the approval weight is concluded at a time much before messages reach the pruning age.
+ Voting: We require that any voting is concluded much before messages reach the pruning age. 
+ Data flow: The past cone check must be relaxed (???TODO)


## 7.1.3 Proof of Inclusion and Pruning

In order to keep the ledger concise data that is sufficiently far in the past can be removed. We call this process pruning. Thus the IOTA protocol for a standard node does not attempt to keep all information back until the genesis. Rather the protocol effectively becomes a filter mechanism to proof whether a certain message was at some point in the past included in the ledger. This can be done e.g. through a Merkel tree proof. 

Transactions are a special type of message, that cannot be pruned. Specifically when a transaction contains an unspent output, see [5.1. UTXO](./5.1%20UTXO.md), the transaction shall be kept when pruning the ledger. An optimisation of this process is possible by reducing the message to only keeping the information about the unspent outputs, however the implementation will be more complicated, and thus is ommited in this first iteration of the protocol.

## 7.1.5 Pruning dependencies

We require several conditions to be fullfilled in order to allow for a smooth pruning process. Pruning is done when messages reach the age `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

Since messages cannot attach to a message whose timestamp has an age difference of more than `DELTA`, see [4.3.4 R-URTS](./4.3%20Tip%20Selection%20Algorithm.md/#4.3.4%20R-URTS), and the timestamp precision is enforced through voting, see [4.2.3 General Timestamp rules](./4.2%20Timestamps.md/#4.2.3%20General%20Timestamp%20rules). Finalization of messages must be guaranteed to happen before the point of pruning. Thus any message must be either confirmed or rejected before the elapse of the pruning age. This requires that both voting on timestamps and conflicts, as well as the accumulation of sufficient approval weight takes a time much smaller than `DELTA_PRUNE`. 

In order to allow a smooth pruning, any message at the age `DELTA_PRUNE` must either belong to the branch `masterBranch` or `rejectedBranch`. This simply means that messages are either confirmed or rejected. 

Transaction must pass a past cone check, see [### 2.4.4.6 Booker - Point 7.](./2.4%20Data%20Flow.md/#2.4.4.6%20Booker). However the past cone check cannot apply to messages below a certain age `DELTA_PASTCHECK<<DELTA_PRUNE`. Thus, the past cone check there needs to be relaxed (???TODO).

With the above conditions we can safely assume any message before the time `DELTA_PRUNE>>DELTA` can be pruned. 

## 7.1.6 Pruning process

An output is considered *confirmed* spent, when the transaction spending an output is confirmed. A flag `confirmedSpent` *shall* be set to `TRUE` in the metadata of the output when this event is triggered.

Once a message reaches the age `DELTA_PRUNE` several checks are performed:

+ If the message is a data message it can be removed. 
+ If the message is a value message and is rejected, i.e. is member of the `rejectedBranch` it can be removed.
+ If the message is a value message and is confirmed, i.e. is member of the `masterBranch` it is checked, whether any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent. 
+ If all outputs are confirmed spent the value message is removed. 
+ If any of the outputs is unspent, i.e. not confirmed spent, the message *shall* be stored, and its references to parents are set to the `genesis`.

## 7.1.7 Post pruning

Transactions that are unspent at the time of pruning, remain in the database. Once all their outputs are confirmed spent, i.e. the flags `confirmedSpent` are `TRUE`, the transaction is deleted.
